[docs] Add Tailwind CSS v4 integration guide (#45906)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/material/integrations/tailwindcss/tailwindcss-v4.md

# Tailwind CSS v4 integration

<p class="description">Learn how to use Material UI with Tailwind CSS v4.</p>

## Frameworks

There are 2 steps to integrate Tailwind CSS v4 with Material UI:

1. Configure the styles to generate with `@layer` directive.
2. Set up layer order to have `mui` comes before `utilities` layer so that Tailwind CSS classes can override Material UI styles.

If you are using a framework, you can follow the instructions below to set up the integration.

### Next.js App Router

> Follow the [App Router guide](/material-ui/integrations/nextjs/#app-router) and do the following steps:

Author: Good point.

> - enable the [CSS layer feature](/material-ui/integrations/nextjs/#using-other-styling-solutions) as shown below.

Author: Make sense to me.

};
```

- configure the layer order with `GlobalStyles` component (it must be the first child of `AppCacheProvider`).

```tsx title="pages/_app.tsx"
import { AppCacheProvider } from '@mui/material-nextjs/v15-pagesRouter';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';

export default function MyApp(props: AppProps) {
  const { Component, pageProps } = props;
  return (
    <AppCacheProvider {...props}>
      <GlobalStyles styles="@layer theme, base, mui, components, utilities;" />
      {/* Your app */}
    </AppCacheProvider>
  );
}
```

### Vite.js or any other SPA

Open `src/main.tsx` and do the following steps:

- set `enableCssLayer` prop to `StyledEngineProvider` component.
- configure the layer order with `GlobalStyles` component.

```tsx title="main.tsx"
import { StyledEngineProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';

ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('root')!).render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <StyledEngineProvider enableCssLayer>
      <GlobalStyles styles="@layer theme, base, mui, components, utilities;" />
      {/* Your app */}
    </StyledEngineProvider>
  </React.StrictMode>,
);
```

> ## Tailwind IntelliSense for VS Code

Author: This is to achieve the same experience when customizing inner slots of a component.

```js
<Input slotProps={{ input: { className: "..." } }} />
```

By default, the extension will not show Tailwind classes when typing the value after the `className` key.
It only works with `className` prop, e.g. `<Input className="…">`

I think we should have this section because it's the first thing that I have to set it up when using Tailwind CSS with Material UI. The info about the setup is scattered in Github issues, so having this section would save developers a lot of time.

For context, the [extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bradlc.vscode-tailwindcss) is the official Tailwind CSS extension which is massively used by (I guess every one who uses Tailwind CSS).

# Tailwind CSS v4 integration

<p class="description">Learn how to use Material UI with Tailwind CSS v4.</p>

## Frameworks

There are 2 steps to integrate Tailwind CSS v4 with Material UI:

1. Configure the styles to generate with `@layer` directive.
2. Set up layer order to have `mui` comes before `utilities` layer so that Tailwind CSS classes can override Material UI styles.

If you are using a framework, you can follow the instructions below to set up the integration.

### Next.js App Router

Follow the [App Router guide](/material-ui/integrations/nextjs/#app-router) and do the following steps:

> - pass `{ enableCssLayer: true }` to the `options` prop of `AppRouterCacheProvider` component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- enable the CSS layer feature
```
People will figure out what they need to do in the code-snippet bellow.

```tsx title="src/app/layout.tsx"
import { AppRouterCacheProvider } from '@mui/material-nextjs/v15-appRouter';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';

export default function RootLayout() {
  return (
    <html lang="en" suppressHydrationWarning>
      <body>
        <AppRouterCacheProvider options={{ enableCssLayer: true }}>
          {/* Your app */}
        </AppRouterCacheProvider>
      </body>
    </html>
  );
}
```

- configure layer order in the Tailwind CSS file.

```css title="src/app/globals.css"
@layer theme, base, mui, components, utilities;
@import 'tailwindcss';
```

> ### Next.js Pages Router

Author: This is expected because we haven't release https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/45596.

Follow the [Pages Router guide](/material-ui/integrations/nextjs/#pages-router) and do the following steps:

> - pass a custom cache with `{ enableCssLayer: true }` to `documentGetInitialProps` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- enable the CSS layer feature
```

Same as above.

```tsx title="pages/_app.tsx"
import { AppCacheProvider } from '@mui/material-nextjs/v15-pagesRouter';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';

export default function MyApp(props: AppProps) {
  const { Component, pageProps } = props;
  return (
    <AppCacheProvider {...props}>
      <GlobalStyles styles="@layer theme, base, mui, components, utilities;" />
      {/* Your app */}
    </AppCacheProvider>
  );
}
```

### Vite.js or any other SPA

To integrate Tailwind CSS v4 with Material UI in a Vite-based app, make the following changes in `src/main.tsx`:

1. Pass the `enableCssLayer` prop to the `StyledEngineProvider` component.
2. Configure the layer order with the `GlobalStyles` component.

```tsx title="main.tsx"
import { StyledEngineProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
import GlobalStyles from '@mui/material/GlobalStyles';

ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('root')!).render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <StyledEngineProvider enableCssLayer>
      <GlobalStyles styles="@layer theme, base, mui, components, utilities;" />
      {/* Your app */}
    </StyledEngineProvider>
  </React.StrictMode>,
);
```

## Tailwind CSS IntelliSense for VS Code

> Follow the [Tailwind CSS IntelliSense installation guide](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/editor-setup#intellisense-for-vs-code) and then add the following configuration to your [VS Code `settings.json`](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/settings#_settings-json-file) file:

Reviewer 2: I would suggest rearranging this section to inform readers why they need to do this before telling them how. I also realized that the Tailwind CSS docs don't really include installation instructions per se—they just link you to the VS Code marketplace, so I think we should do the same to get the user there directly. Here's how I'd rewrite this:

```suggestion
The official [Tailwind CSS IntelliSense](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bradlc.vscode-tailwindcss) extension requires extra configuration to work properly when customizing the interior slots of Material UI components.
After installing the extension, add the following line to your [VS Code `settings.json`](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/settings#_settings-json-file) file:
```

Author: Wow, that's a lot better.

```json
{
  // ...config
  "tailwindCSS.experimental.classRegex": [["className\\s*:\\s*['\"]([^'\"]*)['\"]"]]
}
```

> This enables Tailwind CSS IntelliSense when customizing slots in Material UI components as shown in the image below.

Reviewer 2: if you take my suggestion above then you could write something like this here:

```suggestion
Now you should see the autocomplete and syntax highlighting features when using the `slotProps` prop, as shown in the screenshot below:
```

![A preview of Tailwind CSS Intellisense](/static/material-ui/tailwind-intellisense.jpg)

## Usage

- Use the `className` prop to apply Tailwind CSS classes to the root element of the component.

> - Use `slotProps.{slotName}.className` to apply Tailwind CSS classes to a component's [interior slots](/material-ui/customization/overriding-component-structure/#interior-slots).

Reviewer 2: We introduce the concept of interior slots in the IntelliSense section before describing why it matters in this Usage section. I think we should probably move this above the IntelliSense section.

Author: Got you. I wrote the docs based on my user experience of the setup.
I'd say I rather have everything setup before start using Tailwind with Material UI.

I afraid that if the "Usage" comes before, users might not realize about the extension setup when they don't see autocomplete of Tailwind classes in the slots.
